Project proposal 2
================
Natalie
2019-01-21

## Following up on Project Proposal 1

Last week, I presented an project proposal that deals with air quality
data in American urban environments and relating this data to racial and
socioeconomic demographic data. In meeting with Bill last week, the main
concern was that I didn’t include any previous study/paper/project that
had done something similar. I looked for previous projects where people
had done a similar study, but had a hard time finding a truly
data-driven project. (I’m still in communication with a librarian to see
if anything pops up). For the time being, therefore, I’m planning on
pivoting to a new idea explained below\!

## Presenting an Alternate Idea

For my final project, I’m interested in looking at trends in
gentrification and police interactions with gentrified neighborhoods.
I’ve been interested in this question of police in gentrified
neighborhoods, especially after being in San Francisco after the
shooting of Alex Nieto in Bernal Heights (where a new Bernal Heights
resident had reported Nieto to the police after seeing him sitting on a
bench carrying a burrito and a taser). Anecdotally, as well, I’ve heard
of increased calls to police in gentrified neighborhoods. I’m interested
in looking at racial demographic data over time in relation to data on
calls to police.

## Project Overview

This project will use data about Harlem’s racial demographic and quality
of life complaints to police from 2000 to 2016. The analysis will relate
the movement of white communities into a historically Latinx
neighborhood and an increase in 311 police calls. (If possible, I will
also add additional analysis of non-311, but rather crime complaints to
NYPD).

## The Original Study

In June 2018, Buzzfeed published an article titled, “They Played
Dominoes Outside Their Apartment For Decades. Then The White People
Moved In And Police Started Showing Up.” This study analyzes a few
blocks in Harlem and racial demographic trends between 2000 and 2016. It
shows the movement of white people into the neighborhood in correlation
with an increased number of 311 quality of life complaints (usually
noise-related) to the police. I will be trying to recreate this study,
and possibly elaborate on the study by also relating 311 calls to crime
complaints.

[They Played Dominoes Outside Their Apartment For Decades. Then The
White People Moved In And Police Started Showing
Up](https://www.buzzfeednews.com/article/lamvo/gentrification-complaints-311-new-york)

[The Github repository that goes along with the
study](https://github.com/BuzzFeedNews/2018-06-nyc-311-complaints-and-gentrification)

## The Data

I will be making use of a few different datasets:

  - On gentrification and racial demographic shifts:
    <https://github.com/BuzzFeedNews/2018-06-nyc-311-complaints-and-gentrification/blob/master/data/edited_LTDB_Std_2000_fullcount_sample.csv>
  - On 311 calls:
    <https://nycopendata.socrata.com/Social-Services/311-Service-Requests-from-2010-to-Present/erm2-nwe9>
  - On crime complaints:
    <https://data.cityofnewyork.us/Public-Safety/NYPD-Complaint-Data-Current-Year-To-Date-/5uac-w243>

## Making a challenge

I think it would be interesting to have the challenge just look at the
311 data in particular. The first part of the challenge could be to
visualize trends in the 1) quantity and 2) type of 311 calls made to
NYPD over the course of several years. For a second part of the
challenge, the team could visualize 311 complaints over the course of
the year. I’d be interested to see if there is a seasonal aspect of this
data (ie more complaints made during the summer, when people are
spending more time outdoors) or if one could draw other conclusions.

## Milestones (looking ahead to the rest of the quarter\!)

  - Progress report 1 (Week 4)
      - Recreate BuzzFeed study, or have roughly comparable results on
        trends in gentrification and trends in 311 calls (via data
        wrangling and manipulation)
      - Have preliminary visualizations relating these trends
      - Decide if it’s possible within the time frame to add another
        element (dataset on crime complaints)
  - Progress report 2 (Week 6)
      - Refine visualizations
      - Add in spatial maps
  - Challenge for the rest of the team (Week 7)
      - Have challenge outline completed for the team
      - Have a robust solution for the challenge
  - Final report (Week 9)
      - Have final report presenting high quality visualizations
      - Include thoughtful conclusions about the visualizations
