Project proposal 1
================
Natalie
2019-01-13

## Project Overview

I’m interested in looking at air quality data in urban American
environments and looking at the intersection of air quality and
neighborhood demographics in terms of race, socioeconomic status, and
opportunity outcomes. Going into this project, I have the following
questions:

  - Is there disproportionately poorer air quality in majority minority
    neighborhoods versus majority white neighborhoods?
  - In poor neighborhoods versus rich neighborhoods?
  - What are the health consequences of poor air quality and air
    pollution?

There have been a few studies done about racial and socioeconomic
disparities in environmental quality in the United States, including a
few published in Environmental Health Perspectives.

[This study](https://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/doi/10.1289/ehp.01109s4501)
analyzes air pollution using hospital admissions for pollutant-related
health issues and determines that socioeconomic status and healthcare
disparities impact the effect of poor air quality on lower income
people.

[This one](https://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/doi/10.1289/EHP959) specifically
looks at transportation-related pollution and NO2 concentration.

Finally, [this
one](https://ehp.niehs.nih.gov/doi/10.1289/isee.2016.4642) looks at air
quality improvement.

I’d like to recreate elements of these studies, but incorporate analyses
of specific neighborhood demographics and health consequences of air
pollution. I would also love to do some nifty visualizations (which are
sadly missing from the above studies…)

I would like to look at a few different types of datasets, namely
datasets on air quality, on neighborhood life expectancy, on
pollution-related hospitalizations (such as asthma), and neighborhood
racial demographics.

## The Data

The data I’ve found so far can be grouped into a few sections:

\*Air pollution and air quality

  - [WHO Global Urban Ambient Air Quality
    Database](https://www.who.int/phe/health_topics/outdoorair/databases/cities/en/)
  - [CDC Daily Census Tract-Level PM2.5
    Concentrations, 2011-2014](https://data.cdc.gov/Environmental-Health-Toxicology/Daily-Census-Tract-Level-PM2-5-Concentrations-2011/fcqm-xrf4)
  - [Berkeley Earth Air Quality Real-time
    Maps](http://berkeleyearth.org/air-quality-real-time-maps-data-download/)

\*Asthma

  - [This dataset is
    California-specific](https://data.chhs.ca.gov/dataset/asthma-ed-visit-rates-lghc-indicator-07)
  - [CDC 2015 BRFSS Asthma Call-back Survey
    (ACBS)](https://www.cdc.gov/brfss/acbs/2015_documentation.html)

\*Racial demographics

  - I had a bit of a hard time accessing neighborhood racial demographic
    data because the census and data.gov websites are down because of
    the government shutdown but I found the following:
  - [Los
    Angeles-specific](https://data.lacity.org/A-Livable-and-Sustainable-City/Census-Data-by-Neighborhood-Council/nwj3-ufba)
  - [Census](https://www.census.gov/topics/population/race/data/tables.2016.html)

## Project Goals

The goal of this project is to understand if neighborhoods with a
greater percentage of racial minorities in American cities are more
affected by poor air quality than majority white neighborhoods. Create
visualizations that clearly communicate possible relationships between
racial demographics and air quality, with information about
racially-disparate air-related health issues.
